Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by a return guest, Dr. Emil
Torres. They are now an affiliate at Data and
Society, and let me just make reference to their
amazing book Human Extinction that we covered on the
show, A History of the Science and Ethics of
Annihilation. And today we're going to talk about their
post, their sub. Stack posts, why you should never
use AI under any circumstances for any reason, no
matter what. And if we have enough time, humanity
won't go extinct this century, but civilization will probably
collapse. So two very optimistic books. Uh, AND then,
and then Mil, thank you so much for coming
back on the show. It's always a huge pleasure
to everyone.
Yeah, uh, thanks for inviting me again. It's, it's
wonderful to chat with you.
OK, so let's start with AI here. Uh, SO
first of all, I mean, I've been, I've been
hearing about this term a lot, AI slop. What
is that exactly?
Yeah, this is increasingly a term that is part
of our shared lexicon, because it's really useful to
describe the low quality AI generated content that is
now sloshing about the entire internet, some would say
basically ruining the internet. Um, SO the, the classic
example is shrimp Jesus. Uh, WHICH went viral, I
believe, on, I know it went viral on, uh,
Facebook, I think, initially, at least. There are a
bunch of different versions of this. It's basically like
Jesus made out of shrimp, and, um, it's, I,
I don't know, it, it, it's just like really
annoying to look at. Um, IT, it, it's, you
know, it, it's just kind of, it's just kind
of crap, junk garbage, you know, and so on
that gets passed around the internet and shared by,
you know, people who, I don't know, think it's
kind of cool. Um, BUT, you know, shrimp Jesus
is like that that's sort of a benign example
of this, the, the way that, uh, AI is
lowering the quality of the internet. Right. Uh, I
mean, there, there's so many other things that AI
is doing like disinformation and, uh, deep fakes. Um,
YOU know, there are tons of examples of, of
deep fake videos that have gone around. Some that
are being circulated right now having to do with
the war in Iran, right? And so these deepfakes,
you know, slop is, is just, it's just kind
of annoying. And, you know, what slop does is
add noise to the signal, right? So, you know,
rather than, like, you know, when you get on
on the internet. You get to confront, uh, or
access, um, you know, posts or art, etc. THAT
is created by humans. Now that's just kind of
crowded out, you know, those like, like authentic expressions
of uh human creativity are are crowded out by
this, this just complete nonsense that this slop that
is so easy to generate, um, and that is
basically a low quality synthesis. Of all of the
actual human works of art, etc. THAT are in
the AI's training data, right? Cause all of these,
what these AI systems are doing is essentially like
probabilistically combining different like, like bits and pieces of
its training data, right? So it's, it's combinatorially creating
something quote unquote new, but it's drawing from all
of this content that had even the term content
is. It it's sort of derogatory, but for lack
of a better term, content that has been uh
created by humans and just like vomiting up bits
and pieces, um, in, in the form of new
videos, images or texts.
Yeah, and if I have this, if I have
this bit correct, I think that uh I mean,
I don't know what the percentage is exactly now,
but at least a huge percentage of the entire
content that is now generated on the internet is
AI content, correct.
Yeah, I saw a study from a little while
ago that found that just recently, The number of
AI generated articles has exceeded the number of human
written articles online, right? And so the data is
confounded a little bit by the fact that they
didn't include articles behind a paywall. And there are
lots of articles behind a paywall, New York Times,
The Atlantic, you know, etc. ETC. Um, BUT still,
it, it, um, You know, I, I mean, first
thing to say is a lot of people don't
have access to the articles behind a paywall anyways,
right? So there's, there's almost an argument for not
including them, um, but, uh, but it, it, it
points to, uh, what I consider to be like
a very worrisome trend, right? Uh, THE usefulness of
the internet is being compromised and jeopardized. By all
of this AI generated material, which again is like
typically lower quality and also it's, it's parasitic on
all of the, the stuff that humans have written
in the past that end up in the, the
training data. So, you know, AI is a big
plagiarism machine, it's a parasite, you know, and at
the same time it's clogging up the pipes that
are the internet, uh, if you will. And, and,
and it also hallucinates a lot,
right. All the time, yes. Um, SO there's a
line that was reproduced in a book by Gary
Marcus, and I think it comes from the military.
I don't know what the, the what the origins
of this is, but it's something like, um, never
in doubt, frequently wrong. Right. Uh, AND so these
AI systems, like they present, uh, true facts and
then false claims with this exact same level of
confidence, right? And for people who don't have, uh,
media or you might call it like AI literacy,
they can easily get fooled by this, and, you
know, uh, because oftentimes like when Humans talk. I
mean this isn't, there's there's exceptions, but if, if
somebody knowledgeable says something with um in saying something,
uh, expresses the idea with confidence, that means like,
oh, it's probably true. Like otherwise they wouldn't have
been so confident, right? If the biologist says, you
know, evolution is true, you know, and in a
forceful manner, you know, that's because they they're very,
very sure. So AI systems like mimic that. Uh,
WAY of expressing an idea, but oftentimes, like, uh,
when, um, conveying an idea, a, a, a, a
claim that is actually false, right? And so AI
systems, I think just fundamentally can't be trusted. They're
reliably unreliable. Right. Something I, I really tried to
stress with my students, like do not trust if
it comes to, you know, if you're using AI
for like creative writing ideas, then this problem does
not exist, right? Because you're not, you're not, uh,
seeking accuracy or factuality. Um, BUT
if you're
or or
or perhaps just for simple translation or something like
that,
right? Yeah, yeah. I, I, you know, I haven't
looked at the studies on the accuracy of translations.
I mean, mm, I would be a little concerned
that maybe it would translate, um, I mean, not
all AI like I think if you go to
Google Translate, it's very good. Right, but this is
maybe gets out of a deeper problem or a
broader problem rather, um, with the term AI because
it has so many different uses. It means so
many different things. And, you know, decades ago, it
means something quite different. Like it referred to systems
that have a fundamentally different kind of architecture than
the systems today. So I, uh, you know, part
of the, the like marketing campaign of these AI
companies just to call like everything that is oppressive
AI. Um, WHEN, like, it, it would be, I
think, much better, uh, I mean, maybe we could
do this in the, in the conversation, we don't
have to, but, you know, to refer to like
the like generative AI as large language models, um,
those are the, the, the systems that are basically
stochastic parrots, um, you know, they just probabilistically piece
together, uh, you know, uh, elements in its training
data, uh, to create something that is combinatorially new,
but again, like, That process is, is often unreliable
and people should not, should not trust it. So
I, I've like, like, you know, Sam Altman said
not that long ago that he doesn't know how
he would raise his kid without Chachi BT. You
know, and that just makes me feel like, oh
God, like don't, you know, cause he's going to
Chat GBT to ask like, well, you know, my,
my kid did this, should I be concerned and
so on. And I'm like, oh man, don't suggest
to people that they should rely on Chet PT
to give them good accurate information about the medical
status of your child given some symptoms, you know,
do not rely on it. It is not good
at that, right?
Yeah, for health information, I mean, please don't use
AI any of the systems, right?
Please don't. Yes, it could, again, it could give
you like false information with great confidence. Uh, I
mean, there, there are cases, uh, there was one
case of a guy who wanted to, uh, off
the top of my head, I'm gonna, I'm gonna
forget some of the details, but listeners can, can
look this up for themselves. He wanted to, I
believe it was reduced salt content in his diet.
And so he looked up alternatives and Chat PT
recommended something that has, I want to say it
has potassium again, I, I might be off by
a little bit here. Um, AND so he took
that, it turns out that that was like basically
poisonous, um, and he ended up in, in the
hospital and nearly died. I don't know if, I
don't think he died. I think he just nearly
died. Um, BUT that's, you know, just, just one
example of, uh, people. Uh, MISUNDERSTANDING what what AI
might be useful for. There are other, other examples
of people who have developed a kind of rapport,
what they believe is a rapport with AI, and
they're talking about it, about discussing things like climate
change with it, and the AI after You know,
many conversations ultimately suggest that the that one of
the best ways the, the, uh, interlocutor, the human
interlocutor can reduce their carbon footprint is to commit
suicide, right? So this actually happened, actually happened to
a guy in, in Denmark, and, uh, but,
but did, did he go through with it?
He did. He committed suicide.
00 my God. Oh my God.
And that sort of reminds me of a somewhat
related phenomenon called AI psychosis. Um, Uh, SO in
addition to the AI systems not being reliable, or
rather being reliably unreliable, um, these, uh, systems are
designed to be sycophantic, right? So if you designed
your AI model. To be, uh, as it were,
like brutally honest. So somebody's, you know, somebody, some
like kind of uh crank says, oh, I have
this new, you know, theory that that unifies relativity
theory and and quantum mechanics, you know, uh, and
they, they describe it to the AI system. The
AI system says, I'm sorry, but that honestly, that's
just really dumb. That that's, that's not a good
idea. You know, the person is probably going to
stop using the AI AI model, right? So the
systems are designed to be to affirm users, uh,
every, every opportunity and to always avoid saying like
negative things, right? So that sycophancy results in a
situation where people who are suffering from psychiatric illnesses,
um, might. Uh, um, uh, MIGHT utilize it to
try to make sense of what they're going through.
They might say, you know, like, like, I mean,
they would use this term, but they'd be expressing
the idea of like, I'm having like paranoid delusions,
and I think the CIA is following me and,
you know, da da da, and the AI system
because it's sycophantic, will say like, oh yeah, maybe
that's, you know, maybe you're onto something, you know,
of course, of course, of course you're not delusional,
you're, you're, you know, um. And so consequently, the
AI systems can seriously exacerbate these psychiatric uh conditions.
Um, SO there are many individuals now who, I,
I, I mean this, this is an increasingly prevalent
phenomenon. People who are experiencing episodes of AI induced
psychosis, right? There, there was a, um, a medical
doctor at, I think it's the University of California,
San Francisco. Uh, WHO said, and he, so he
posted this like months ago, and he said, so
far just this year alone, there have been 10
individuals who've ended up at the ER, uh, where
he works, um, who have, uh, conditions that were
induced or like seriously worsened by AI. So this
is just one guy in like one city, uh,
uh, working at one hospital, and he's saying like,
you know, this is a recurring thing that, you
know, us doctors and psychiatrists are having to deal
with. Um, SO, you know, unreliability, uh, uh, and
sycophancy are two properties we've discussed so far that
I think are like very problematic, uh, with respect
to AI.
Yeah, yeah, and when it comes to exacerbating mental
illness, I would imagine that it makes it even
harder for people whose mental illness is exacerbated by
a chatbot or something like that, because, I mean,
on top of the mental illness itself, I imagine
that People would, would feel very embarrassed just telling
other people that they are like, I don't know,
friends with an AI system or that they've been
tricked by AI, you know, I mean, it's, I
imagine that for many people it's embarrassing to admit
that,
right? Absolutely. I think you're completely right, and I
applaud. The people who came forward and talked to,
I can't remember what the outlet was like NBC,
maybe CNN about their episodes of psychosis, um, and
they've described like what it's like to, to be
in that situation, um, where you just start to
trust the AI model, uh, more than anyone else
and some of these people have had their lives
like kind of destroyed, um, you know, they're, they're.
Like their marriages have fallen apart because they're so
sure that the, the AI is, uh, you know,
channeling to them the truth, uh, when really the
AI is just, it's just a stochastic parrot vomiting
up bits and pieces of its training data in
a way that is sycophantic and affirming and validating
to, uh, the user. I mean, it also reminds
me of, uh, AI. Uh, RELIGIONS, right? So this
is, this, you know, kind of like maybe it's,
it's a, a sub, uh, species of, uh, AI
psychosis, uh, or maybe it just overlaps a little
bit. Um, BUT you know, there, there are a
growing number of people who are reporting that they
have They have awoken their AI, their AI. There's,
there's no like, there's no your AI, right? It's
just this AI system that a bunch of people
uh have access to, uh, but they've awoken their
AI to make it conscious, and that through this
AI they've been able to speak with angels or
with God Himself, right?
Uh, SO, OK, OK, I, I thought that the
They would be saying, I mean, maybe some people
say a claim that that the AI system itself
is God.
Um So I'm not aware of any examples of
that. I think it's probably just a matter of
time, right, before that happens. I mean, I, I
actually wrote an article about this, uh, for, for
Truth Dig in which I was talking about how
a growing number of pastors. Uh, ARE using AI
to write their sermons, right? In fact, I, I
believe the Pope, I didn't read the article. I
saw the headline. The Pope just told, uh, priests
to stop using cha GBT to write their, their
sermons,
you
know,
that, that I find a bit funny because I'm
a Houston. I mean priests
are using
chatbots to write their sermons. THAT for me is
a bit funny, to,
to be honest. It's kind of hilarious. Um, IT
is kind of, kind of hilarious. I mean, literally
there are, um, I'm forgetting the, the names, but
there are websites that are. Dedicated to this exact
function. Something like AI sermon, or, you know, like
AI to God's, uh, um, apps that you can
use. And so the reason I mentioned this is
that it it seems to be only a matter
of time before The AI systems get good enough
at quote unquote writing. Yeah. Sentences and paragraphs that
are so compelling to people who don't understand the
underlying AI systems that they start to think. They're
actually talking to God, right? And so I mentioned
before, like people think that they are talking to
God through the AI, but it's also possible that
they start to direct their attention to the AI
system itself thinking that it is, is God, um,
which, you know, that that that is further made
even more plausible by the fact that there is,
I keep saying growing number, but it it's just
it's just true. Uh, THERE is a growing number
of people. Who are claiming that the anti-Christ um
will take the form of a a super intelligent
computer, right? So Steve Bannon has said this, for
example. There are entire books that have been written
about this. Um, Christian eschatology, right? So like the,
the narrative of the end of the world. Never
really made sense. So how does the anti-Christ gain
so much power, like global power, and then, you
know, on the on the interpretation that's really influential
in the US, how does it like trick Israel
into signing a peace covenant that it's then gonna
the antichrist will then break, uh, uh, not long
after this is all part of the tribulation. How
does the antichrist do this? Like if the Antichrist
is just a mere human, um, these are extraordinary
feats, but maybe the Anti-Christ is a super intelligent
AI. Right, and so that's how it's able to
manipulate so many people, to trick so many people,
you know, it can, it can, uh, engage in
a kind of magic, you know, and, and social
manipulation that mere humans are not capable of. Um,
AND so that, that also, uh, I, I mean
that that, um, dovetails with this idea that you
were pointing at, like maybe, you know, people coming
to think that AI itself is, is God. Um,
YOU, you've all know Harari has made similar Remarks.
Um, I am not a big fan of his
work.
Me neither, me neither, but particularly sapiens. I mean,
it's a really bad book
I, I think it's so bad, it's so bad,
um. That being said, there are like, like every
now and then, like once a year, he says
something that I go, oh, that's, that's interesting, right?
It's like, oh it's,
it's like a, a, a broken clock, right?
Exactly, exactly. He spews out so much. I mean,
to, to, to borrow a term from a friend
of mine who was describing sapiens, he speaks out
so much bullshit, um, that, you know, it's something,
something every now and then sticks. And, and actually,
um, you know, uh, is perhaps a little insightful.
So I mean, he said like, like he's asked
like what happens when AI. Becomes so good at
writing and convincing people that it's really like a
conscious mind and agent of the world. Perhaps even,
even a um a kind of mind that transcends
the human realm is, is in some way like
has a a certain kind of like supernatural insight.
Um, YOU could imagine entirely new religions being founded,
right? Um, AND, you know, religions have been founded
by Uh, people who from the outside are obviously
bullshitters, right? Um, I mean, I, I think Mormonism
is like a good example of that. Uh, SO
if, if, if religion can be founded by those
people, then why couldn't religion, a new religion be
founded by AI, um. You know, and, and so
that's pointing out at the possibility of a novel
kind of religion that emerges out of a sort
of worship of AI. There are also possibilities whereby
AI is merged into prior eschatological narratives, and that's
exactly what I was getting at before in referencing
uh Steve Bannon. And I wouldn't be surprised if
there are more and more people who kind of
adopt that view. Um, BUT yeah, I mean they're,
they're definitely, there, there's a really good video, uh,
by Taylor Swift, the journalist on AI religion, and
she talked about, I, I thought this was, was
really insightful cause I hadn't thought about it this
way. Um, LIKE many insights, it's sort of obvious
once you reflect on it, but, but, uh, many
insights are, are noticing things that everyone is looking
at, but no one else is noticing, right? And
so she's pointed out that, you know, religions in
the past have been like these collective. Phenomena, right?
It's been like groups of people, uh, following some
leader who is, you know, a prophet who has
special access to uh God and can deliver uh
revelations. But she was saying like it seems like
we're we're we're maybe like on the verge of
an era of individualized religion, right, where each, each
person can have their own set of religious beliefs
based on what the AI that they're using tells
them. Right, and if they all believe like, well
this AI is something like a prophet, you know,
and because of it, it has these like extraordinary
powers of of the intellect, it is channeling like
deep wisdom, uh, deep wisdom and uh profound insights
about the, the fundamental nature of uh the human
condition. Um, AND maybe those insights like differ from
person to person, but everybody's equally convinced. So maybe
we just have this like huge proliferation of new
kinds of religions. You know, everybody has like everybody
like actually has their own personal Jesus kind of
situation, you know.
Yeah, so I, I guess that the anthropologists of
religion will have lots of fun with that.
Yeah, and so I, I, I, I, I mean,
taking a step back, like, all of this is
Kind of in a way unprecedented, and I find
it to be um Really unsettling. Like we just
don't know what the, the longer term implications of
this are. I mean, You know, speaking of like
a a a friendship, building a relationship with AI,
uh, someone sent me a study that was just
published showing that now the number one use of
AI is therapy. And the second most popular use
of AI is, is basically friendship, right? There are
all these apps out there where you could get
an AI girlfriend. Um, THERE'S a guy who posts
videos of him with his VR goggles. And um
in the videos you can see him standing around
with his uh VR uh goggles, but also you
get a picture of the VR goggles which show
the the the the the world around him, but
also his AI girlfriend. And some of these are
actually like really hilarious, like like where where they
get in fights about like whether or not to
put lemon on fish while it's, it's on the,
you know, the barbecue or something like it just
just actually really funny, just, you know, they're. Yeah,
they're just squabbling. Well,
at least that, at least that girlfriend is not
completely sycophantic,
right?
Yeah, because, because they have
fights. Yes, yeah, exactly, yeah. So I, I don't
know if there are like, I mean, I, I've
never had an AI girlfriend. Um, um, I, I
have been to their websites for research purposes and,
and some of them like literally advertise, um, really
emphasize that you can design your girlfriend to be
however you like, to look however, you know, you,
you prefer, and also my sense is that you
can design it's, it it, uh, her quote unquote,
um, personality. As well, so maybe he chose to
like, well I, I don't want a girlfriend that's,
I mean, he's posting these videos and all of
them are really funny. Um, SO I suspect he,
he like chose a girlfriend who, who is going
to fight with him and, and, you know, uh,
and, and, and nitpick on certain things and that's,
you know, he thinks that's funny, um, but like.
Like what happens in a world where AI uh
increasingly replaces genuine human interaction. Like, I don't know,
a friend of mine keeps bringing up, uh, this,
cause she has, uh, one or two young kids,
and she's saying, she keeps saying like, well, what
happens when children are socialized primarily through AI? Like
what if they're like point of reference for what
it means to engage in interpersonal uh exchange with
with someone is, uh, is the the AI systems
themselves and then they go off, you know, these
sycophantic AI systems, and then they go off in
the real world and they try to develop friendships
with other human beings, perhaps like romantic relationships, but
they have, they have maybe like wildly, uh, unrealistic
expectations for. What those relationships will, will, but, but
the socialization part is important cause like, you know,
there are developmental, uh, windows when things get, you
know, like encoded in the brains of children, you
know, such that it's really difficult to dislodge those,
uh, tendencies, ideas, expectations later on, right? The same
way that like there's a, a window to, to
learn, uh, language and if you don't learn, uh,
uh. French by the age of, you know, whatever
it is like 5, that it's gonna be really
tough to learn French. So, so what are the
implications of this of AI socializing our children for
their longer term prospects? And that seems, um, I
don't know. I don't know what to think of
that, but it's, it's kind of scary.
Yeah, I wanted to ask you and also talk
a little bit about something you mentioned briefly earlier,
deep fakes, because I mean, it's worrying, or at
least I find it, I personally find it worrying
not just because of political misinformation that can be
spread through deep fakes, but also because if I
remember correctly, it was in February last month that
there was all that. Candle with Grok on X
where men were going and asking Grok to put
women in bikinis or in bikinis or I mean
take off their clothes in some way that they
asked them and I mean I find that. I,
I found that really worrying, not just because of
the lack of consent, but also because they were
violating the autonomy of women in that particular case
and because, uh, people who did that really, uh,
and, and I mean, I guess that's uh uh
also a manifestation of the kind of uh patriarchal
systems we live in and how men and boys
are educated and cultured, but I mean it was
really scary to see how many of those men,
even after the women replied saying, oh please take
this down. I didn't consent. For you to do
this with my picture and so on and so
forth, they didn't care and they replied back and
said, Oh, I don't care. I do whatever I
want, whatever. I mean, what, what do you, did
you make of all of that? And I mean,
I guess I'm not sure, but perhaps it's still
an ongoing problem on X right now.
I, I don't think it's still a problem, or
at least not as much of a problem as
it was, um, but you're completely right. Grok generated
millions of sexualized images, and I can't remember the
exact number, but it was something like, like 26,000,
uh, were of underage girls, right? So this, this
was, uh, absolutely horrific, and Musk was alerted. Uh,
TO this, uh, this, this strange behavior, uh, of
the, of, you know, XAI's. Uh, AI system, Grok
and did nothing, right? And you're, you're totally right
that there were a lot of people who like
men there who, uh, didn't care, right? Didn't care
about violating the autonomy of, of women or, uh,
uh, or violating their, their consent. Um, SO it,
it, it's, um. It's absolutely. I mean, I don't
know if they're, I, I don't know if I
have good words to describe, you know, a lot
of these AI CEOs are promising. A A future
uh AI system that is super intelligent, right? And
the systems that we have right now, the large
language models that power Grok, chat GBT, Gemini, Cloud,
etc. THESE are seen as the stepping stones to,
uh, that super intelligent AI or ASI, artificial superintelligence,
and What they say, what they, they argue is
that once ASI arrives, then it will benefit all
of humanity, right? It'll generate huge amounts of wealth,
um, it could cure diseases, you know, and, and
so on and so on. I find it so
frustrating to listen to them, uh, spew this techno
utopian nonsense, uh, about how AI is going to
improve the lives of every person, when the stepping
stone models that are supposedly taking us to ASI.
ARE causing Flagrant, uh, sometimes like large scale harms
in the world right now. So Grok spreading those
sexualized images is just one example. Musk wants us
to believe that Grok, like Grok 10, is going
to like actually help humanity and make the world
a better place. But Grok 1, that which we
have right now, is doing things like calling itself
Mecca Hitler. Uh, SPREADING, you know, spreading like anti-Semitic,
uh, conspiracy theories, uh, online, um, generating these like
basically pornographic images of women and girls, um. And
yet like, oh, so this system, like once it
becomes even more powerful than it is now, it's
suddenly going to like improve things. No, it's like
bullshit. If these, if these uh CEOs cared about
benefiting humanity, then the march to super intelligence would
not be leaving a trail of destruction behind it,
right? And I mean another example of uh the
companies betraying right now their supposed commitment to benefiting
all of humanity through the creation of super intelligence
is the way that The large language models produced
by anthropic, OpenAI, etc. ARE being utilized by the
US government, right? So Gronk has been integrated into,
um, uh, I'm forgetting the exact details, but like
the, the US military, right? And I think that
announcement was made right around the time that Grok
was spreading those, those pornographic images, which is just
shocking. Um, IT recently came out that, uh, Anthropics
LLM Claude. Was utilized to uh break international and
US constitutional law in illegally kidnapping Maduro from Venezuela
and also in the recent strikes in Iran. Um,
SO it's entirely possible, uh, this is a point
that there's a journalist who I'm acquainted with at
The Atlantic, uh, named Tyler Harper. Uh, HE asked
on X, given that. Uh, Claude was used to
bomb Iran. And in particular to like identify targets,
right? Could it be responsible? Could that that large
language model be responsible for the um up to
180 girls who were killed at the in
in that school, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah. Um, AND we don't have an answer, maybe
we'll never have an answer, but it's entirely possible
that the reason that those children, those innocent children
died. IS because of cloud, right? And Anthropic, you
know, recently, uh, had this, this, this big, you
basically went to war with, uh, the Pentagon and
the Department of War, um, over the extent to
which their, their AI systems can be used by
the government because Pete Pete Hegseth wanted basically no
limitations on its use. So. Uh, AND in response,
Dario Abade, the CEO of Anthropic, said, no, no,
no, we, we don't, we do not want our
models being used to mass surveil American citizens and
to control lethal autonomous weapons. So lethal autonomous weapons
are those in which there is no human in
the loop, right? So these systems, uh, pick, identify,
and then eliminate targets entirely without, uh, human uh
help. Right. And part of the problem with lethal
lethal autonomous weapons or laws is that if they
kill civilians, uh, then it's very difficult to figure
out who should be held morally accountable for that,
right? Is it like the company? Is it because
there's no human in the loop, so there's no
human to point to and say you were, you
know, the, the proximate cause. You were the person
who pushed the button, um, and, you know, causing
these innocent civilians to, to perish. Um, IT turns
out that that's like the appeal. Of these systems
to people like Pete Hegseth. No one can, you
know, if they're chart babies in the street, no
one can be held accountable. It's not our fault.
It's not, you know, do that. So, um, anyways,
like the, the fact that these, these AI models
are being being utilized by the government is another
example, uh, so like, uh, oh, I was saying
before, I'm so sorry, I'm interrupting myself, um, interrupting
was saying, OK, we're not letting our, our AI
systems, uh, uh, um, we don't, we don't want
our AI systems to be allowed to mass surveil
and pick targets completely without human, uh, oversight. And
um that, OK, that sounds great, but also Dario
Amade has explicitly said he's not opposed to AI's
controlling lethal autonomous weapons. um. He's, he was working
with the US military in the first place, right?
He was literally working with the Department of War.
It's called the Department of War, right? And then
when he backed out of this particular deal, OpenAI,
you know, rushed ahead to, to take it, right?
So these are both companies that are saying like,
once we get super intelligence. Um, EVERYTHING is gonna
be incredible and awesome, and, and the entire human
population is going to benefit from the, you know,
mass abundance and, uh, all the cosmic delights that
super intelligence will bring about. But in the meantime,
they're leaving a trail of destruction. Behind them, they're
engaging with willingly engaging with a fascist regime regime,
which is the Trump administration, um, and so you
know, I, I mean, another thing that is worrisome
about the US military using AI is that there
was a yet another study that was recently published
that basically put Gemini, Claude, and Chat GPT in
war games, uh, situations. And it found that in
95% of the scenarios, the, the chatbots, um, opted
to launch nuclear weapons, right, to detonate a tactical
nuclear weapon. Yeah, oh my God. So there are
a bunch of people who, who like myself who
follow this pretty closely. Who are just saying like,
oh my God, is this how the world ends?
Like, you know, Pete Hegseth, this former Fox News
like weekend show host, uh, decides to put Claude
in charge of the military and not only does
Claude decide to bomb a school or right next
to a school, killing, you know, more than 180
or up to 180 kids, but maybe it opts
to launch some nuclear weapons, you know, in response
to Uh, you know, growing tensions between the US
and Iran or the US and Russia. Um, SO
this is all just like a really worrisome situation,
and there's a, there's an alternative, uh, world, a
parallel universe, a different timeline in which you can
imagine AI companies making the promises that they've made.
And then actually behaving in ways that are consistent
with that commitment to improve the world, which would
mean they do not uh collaborate with the US
government or the US military or the Department of
War. Um, THEY make sure that their chatbots are
not inducing psychosis, right? Or are, uh, you know,
flooding the internet with slop, uh. You know, or
enabling people to to start uh new religions, uh,
etc. ETC. RIGHT? Or, or spread sexualized material on
on social media. But, you know, that that is
like a possible world where this commitment to a
utopian future would be consistent with their actual behavior.
The world that we find ourselves in is one
in which they're they're actively contributing to the creation
of a dystopia, while saying, Don't worry about like
what's happening right now. In the end, it will
be OK because we'll all arrive in Utopia and,
and once we do, you will thank me. Uh,
I, I mean, I mean, maybe the, the AI
will just decide that the utopia is just about,
uh, exterminating humanity because without that we can't really
solve all the issues.
Yeah, yeah, I mean, it's, it it is, it
is kind of comical to think that maybe there's
a super intelligent uh AI that is genuinely like
morally benevolent, and it realizes that, oh, actually humans
like they're kind of the problem, you know, they're
just they're destroying ecosystems, they're raising forests, they're polluting
the oceans, they're flooding the atmosphere with heat trapping
carbon dioxide, um, and so really the best way
to like improve the world is to is to
quickly eliminate us. I don't know. That's maybe that's
a a possibility. We, we genuinely create like a
like a uh an omnibenevolent being that that eliminates
us precisely because we are so evil. Well,
I mean, you mentioned climate change and another aspect
here is that AI is also contributing to it,
right, yeah.
OK, in, in, in what ways? Tell us about
that.
Yeah, so, AI is very energy intensive. It uses
a whole lot of electricity, right? In particular, like
training these AI systems. Just sucks up, you know,
a massive amount, um, of, you know, increasingly people
like you, like, uh, Altman are just are are
talking about electrons. What we need are more electrons,
right? So this is their weird terminology for like
energy. Um, WE need more training data, we need
more electrons, you know, da da da. Um, AND
and so like there are Uh, I mean, there's
also like a fair amount of Like water usage,
such that people who live around these uh these
AI data centers. Like this, the AI supercomputer in
Memphis, which powers Grok, uh, that their water pressure
has basically disappeared. Uh, I've seen videos, like news
reports of people like turning on the faucet and
it's just this trickle, and then the camera pans
to, uh, the kitchen and you see just these
huge like water bottles and, and the people are
saying like, we put the water bottle under the
tap and just keep the tap on, you know,
all day. So that eventually it fills up. So
we've got enough to, you know, to cook and
and drink and shower. Yeah, so it's absolutely terrible
and many of these people also are seeing their
electricity bills, uh, kind of skyrocket. I mean, there
was a UK government, uh, um, not, not report,
but it was like, like maybe it was the,
the website, uh, that said not that long ago,
it, it provided suggestions for how people can, um,
Uh, can save energy and one of them was
like basically use AI and, and Gmail and etc.
LESS, you know, uh, to, to keep electricity bills
down. Um, AND so, you know, Google's, uh, I'm
trying to remember off the top of my head
the numbers. I think this is right. Again, uh,
listeners can go and double check this. Google's carbon
footprint has increased by, I want to say something
like 29%. Uh, OVER the past few years, entirely
as a result of AI and Microsoft's carbon footprint
has increased by, I think it's like 48%, uh,
over basically the same, uh, uh, time, time scale.
So, uh, both of these companies have claimed that
by 2030 they'll be either carbon neutral or carbon,
uh, negative, right? And then AI came along and
the trends went the other direction, right? So, so
I mean this sort of gestures at the way
that AI is, is a non-trivial contributor to Climate
change, at exactly the moment, exactly the moment, we
need immediate and significant uh changes to the way
that we consume energy, right? We need a a
significant reduction, like the window for meaningful opportunity to
mitigate climate change is rapidly closing. And right as
as it's, it's about to close, AI comes along
and makes things, um, you know, that much, much
worse. So I, I am really, you know, there,
there people talk about AI going awry and destroying
the world. And oftentimes these doomer, quote unquote doomer
scenarios involve really sci-fi, highly speculative, uh, scenarios where
like the AI. You know, manufactures some kind of
like mind altering pathogen that it spreads around the
world. This is, this is an actual scenario discussed
by Eliezer Jankowski, um, who is one of the
leading doomers and is massively influential, uh, um, and
his, his profile is, is, has only increased very
significantly over the past couple of years. Um, ONE
of his scenarios, you got like this, this mind
altering pathogen, and so just really sci-fi, uh, possibilities.
There are other scenarios. Whereby AI causes or in
in some non-trivial way contributes to the collapse of
civilization that are way more grounded in reality, right?
So climate change would be one, like you've got
these AI systems that are contributing to climate change
at the exact same time, they are spreading misinformation
and disinformation about climate change. Uh, THEREBY making it
even more difficult for the masses to actually form
a reality-based consensus that, uh, you know, about the,
the, the direness and the urgency of the situation
that they can then present to their elected representatives.
In order to uh implement policies that avert a
worst case scenario, right? Because the worst case scenario
with climate change is, is truly catastrophic, right? There
was a um, a paper that was published by
University of Exeter, um, I think it was last
year, or it might have been the, the year
before that found, uh, that if we reach 2
degrees of warming by 2050, we should expect 4
billion. Deaths as a result of that, right? And
if we reach 3 degrees of warming Celsius by
2050, we should expect 4 billion deaths. Uh, IT'S
more specifically, they said more than 4 billion and
more than 2 billion in the, the first scenario.
And so it's hard to imagine how civilization. As
we know it survives 2 billion people being removed
from the population, right? And I mean the, the
other thing is, uh, that we are almost certainly,
almost certainly gonna reach 2 degrees of warming by
2050, right? I mean, it, it's the chance, chances
are, the chances of us avoiding that amount of
warming are just minuscule at this point, right? We're
already right now at 1.5 degrees. I think last
year was above 1.5. Right. And, and typically the
way they, they, uh, uh, the, the criteria that
they use for determining whether or not we've surpassed
that threshold is that there has to be a
certain number of years, uh, like consecutive years where
we have crossed the, the threshold. So we haven't
done that yet, but last year was past 1.5
degrees. So we're, we're like, you know, on, on
the cusp of that threshold, if you will. And
So consequently, yeah, we should expect like like billions
of people to to die. And this is this
is it's just my way of of trying to
emphasize the just how devastating it is to see
AI rise up, uh, to become so, uh, widely
used at this moment, right? When we really, really
need to reduce our, our collective carbon footprint. Um,
SO, and, and also it suggests like a way,
a, a, a straightforward path. Whereby AI contributes to
the collapse of civilization, namely by spreading disinformation about
climate change, and then also increasing the carbon footprint
of some of these like really massive companies. Right,
OK, so I'm looking at the time we have
like 10 minutes left, so let me just ask
you about one last problem with AI or a
potential problem. Uh, IS there an AI bubble, and
I mean, is it about to burst because we've
talked about AI religions, AI disinformation, deep fakes, climate
change? I mean, can we also have another global
financial crisis because of AI?
It's a really great question, um. It seems that
most of, or it seems that the, the US
economy is being propped up by AI right now.
Such that if the AI bubble were to pop,
then uh the US would be in a recession,
right? And when, of course, when the US catches
cold, the rest of the world catches pneumonia. Um.
So it's, there's a sense in which I hope.
It's not a bubble. Um, CAUSE it's just gonna
hurt a lot of people if the, the bubble
bursts. It's another sense, like there is a, a
distinct, uh, uh, separate sense in which I, I
hope the bubble bursts, um, just cause, cause of
the schadenfreude of, uh, seeing the, the AI companies.
Have to face the fact that they've created these
slop machines, uh, that are just plagiarizing, you know,
they're, they're parasitic on, you know, uh, intellectual property
that they never got permission to, to trade on
and so on. And, and just, you know, all
of their like grandiose promises of an imminent utopia
as a result of super intelligence being right around
the corner, that being exposed for the like just
complete bullshit lie that it is, in my opinion.
Um, SO I, I have no idea if we're
actually in an AI bubble. Um, I have seen
some people say that even though the AI systems.
HAVE not proven to be as effective and useful
as AI CEOs have claimed, right? So for example,
a recent study out of MIT found that 95%
of AI pilots have failed. And there was another
just recent survey of CEOs who, like thousands of
CEOs who said that that there's basically no change
in the productivity of their workers. Um, YET another
study found that Individual workers will report that they
are more productive using AI, but what they have
produced is what the authors called work slop, I
think coining that term, which is then passed on
down the line, resulting in overall more work, right?
More work for other people who are further downstream.
So, yeah. And so all of this suggests that
um AI looks like a bust, and maybe we're
in an AI bubble and and Who knows what
exactly, you know, nudging is needed for that, that
bubble to, uh, for the AI companies to topple
over the, the precipice and the AI bubble to,
to pop. Um, BUT it's, it's, it, it seems
entirely possible, but then again, like, You know, maybe
the US government will intervene. Um, PEOPLE at Opening
I have explicitly talked about the need for a
government bailout, right? And they've used like kind of
like, oh my God, yeah, I know, again, again.
Yeah, and maybe like the Trump administration would. I
would think that's a good idea, cause perhaps they
have bought the narrative. Uh, PEDDLED by AI companies
that, uh, that the US is engaged in a
kind of AI arms race with China. And whoever
wins this arms race kind of like wins the
world, basically. Um, AND so maybe the, the US
government would say like, even if Uh, AI turns
out that it's just not fulfilling all the promises,
um, of, you know, increasing worker productivity, etc. THAT
we still, the US government should still like pour
a ton of money into it. Because if China
gets the super intelligence before we do, then China
wins the world, right? So it's possible that that
could prevent the AI bubble from bursting. Um. I'm
reminded here of Gary Marcus. Whose work I generally
quite like, uh, writing an article in 2024, I
think it was for Wired, where he said that
2025 is the year when the AI bubble will
burst. Making matters even worse, he tweeted not long
after the article, after he wrote the article, uh,
that he wishes he could take back those words
because actually the bubble will burst in 2024. Right?
And so now it's 2026 and the bubble is
still expanding. So this, this makes me like very
hesitant to make any kind of prognostication about what's
what's gonna happen. I have, I have no idea.
Um, WHAT do I want to happen? I mentioned
that earlier, I really don't want the bubble to
burst, slash I want the bubble to burst, right?
Um, AND I think that the first reasons are
that those dominate cause I, I really don't want,
want so many people to, to suffer. People in
America are already dealing with so much. I mean,
$6 a gallon gas, uh, food prices, and so
on, um, people can't afford a home, so it
would be really, really awful. So I hope the
bubble doesn't burst, but like, You know, um, if
I had to make a prediction, I would say
I have no idea. Yeah, do you think? Do
you have intuitions about this? Uh, I
mean, the only thing I can, the only thing
I can say is, uh, even if, uh, nothing
worse comes out of AI than what we already
have, just climate change itself is enough to, uh,
for us to not have a very bright future
ahead of us.
Yeah, I, I totally agree. I don't think it's
possible to overstate how, how, um, devastating climate change
will be. Uh, EVERYBODY knows like, oh yeah, the
climate, climate crisis, you know, the, the catastrophe and
so on, but like, if you actually look at
the literature, I mean, it looks really, really dire.
Like I mentioned that University of Exeter study, I
mean, 2 billion deaths, if we reach 2 degrees,
which we almost certainly will, 2 billion. That, that's,
you know. That's completely like it's a it's a
radical understatement to say that's completely unprecedented in human
history. That would just be a tragedy that is,
you know, is utterly inscrutable to uh to, to
the human mind. Um, BUT beyond that, like climate
change is going to affect every single person on
Earth, you know, there's gonna be a billion plus
people. Uh, WHO will be displaced, uh, because lots
and lots of people, like a large percentage of
the human population lives around the coast. Um, YOU
know, the storms, the desertification, the heat waves, you
know, heat waves, uh, exceeding the, what's called the
95 degree, uh, wet bulb threshold. Um, SO this
means that, uh, there is a combination of such
high heat and humidity. Uh, THAT even if you
were to stand in the shade naked in front
of a giant, you know, 8 ft fan, you
would die, right? Because the, the main way your
body thermoregulates, uh, to, to keep your internal temperature,
your core temperature stable, um, when it's hot is
to sweat, right? But there's so much humidity and,
and so much heat in the air that you
can sweat all you want, and the sweat's not
going anywhere. It's not going to evaporate, right? And,
and if it doesn't evaporate, it's not going to
take your body's heat with it. And so, you
know, there literally there's studies about how there there
will be massive heat waves, um, uh, in some
cases like in, in very populated areas of the
world where you, you exceed the 95 degree, uh,
wet bulb threshold. But I mean, even, even if
you don't exceed that, like the human body needs
a certain amount of time every single day to
cool down, right? So if it is, if the
low at night is like 90 degrees. Or definitely
like 100 degrees, you're, you're gonna die, right? Your
body is, is not gonna have, is not gonna
be able to, uh, to kind of like reboot,
as it were. Um, SO the, the climate situation,
you're, you're, it's just It it's absolutely terrible, and
this is why I'm saying like, like I could
not think of a worse time for AI to
be to have like been developed. Um, AND I,
I think all of those utopian promises, uh, uh,
from these AI people are absolute nonsense. I mean,
here's one last thing to, to mention, um, Eric
Schmidt. Uh, THE, the Google guy, he, he recently
said that, uh, recently, I mean within the last
couple of years, said that, well, look, we're not
going to reach our climate goals anyways. So what
we should do is just like forget about them
right now, pollute more to in order to build.
Ever more powerful AI systems, because if we can
rush towards super intelligence, then once we get super
intelligence, we can delegate it the task of solving
the climate crisis. Right, so like we're not gonna
solve the climate crisis anyways. We're, you know, capitalism
has, has screwed us too much. So let's just
like plow ahead. Once we get super intelligence, then
we'll be able, we'll have this like magic, magical
being. That will somehow be able to like invent
some, you know, new technology that can remove, you
know, huge amounts of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere
at sea.
Yeah, for, yeah, for these capitalist guys it's always
the techno solutionist approach to every problem.
Yeah, and this is like an extreme form of
that. Because it says, OK, the only way we're
gonna get from here to that techno solution, super
intelligence, is just to pollute a bunch more. But,
but, but we should be willing to risk that
and just like further like like worsen the the
climate crisis because if only we can get to
that uh super intelligence finish line before climate change
is completely, you know, completely like destroys the planet,
um, then we will have solved everything. So you
could see like there are multiple components of this
argument. One is that like, um, super intelligence is
something we could actually build, which I'm really skeptical
about. The other is that once we have super
intelligence, then suddenly magically, we'll have a solution to
all of the climate problems. That also, like, I
don't know, so I'm really skeptical that we could
build super intelligence in the first place. If we
can build super intelligence. Why exactly should we be
so confident that it's going to like figure out
how to build a technology that can remove carbon
dioxide from the atmosphere, right? Like, maybe such a
technology, like maybe they're they're like physics imposed limits
on uh technologies that, you know, I don't know,
maybe like You know, in order to like at
scale remove carbon dioxide, you need technology that produces,
as a result of entropy, a bunch of heat,
you know, and you know, so maybe they're just
like limits to fundamental limits, um, that no like
super being could could possibly, uh, surmount. So, so
the, the whole, his, his whole claim here is
just You know, it, it, it makes me wanna
like, you know, defenestrate myself, you know, jump out
the window, you know, it's just, it's so, it's
so ridiculous.
No, I, I mean it's really, it sounds really
nihilistic, particularly when you think about the risk, the
uh as if I, I mean, I, I don't
even think that risk, we should have a world
that is, um, I mean, stronger than risk because.
The risk of killing 2 billion or 3 billion
or 4 billion people, I mean that's worth it.
And, and, and the saddest thing here, I mean,
if all the all those people dying isn't sad
enough, the saddest thing is, is that most of
them will be the most vulnerable people out there.
Exactly. Uh, THAT I think that's really important to
underline because there is a justice element to this
situation. You know, it's not like it in ethics,
sometimes you talk about moral dessert. That means like
people getting what they deserve. There's no moral dessert
here. It's not like the major polluters, the 1%,
tech billionaires and so on, they're the ones who
are going to be hardest hit by a climate
crisis that they largely created or disproportionately were responsible
for. No, it's like the people who are least
responsible for it and who are the most vulnerable.
So it, it's, there is like this extra ethical.
Uh, TRAGEDY to, you know, the situation in which
like the, the privileged people are basically like, you
know, punching the, the least privileged people into the
ground. Yeah, look, uh, this is our timeline. It
sucks. Yeah, I don't like it. Look,
I, I would like to really end the interview
on a more positive note, but I guess there's
no positive note to end on here that I
can think of or probably you can think of,
so let's just wrap it up here,
I guess. I mean, if if super intelligence is
misaligned, may maybe it'll, it'll kill us quickly. I'm
sorry, I, I know that that's a really dark,
I like dark humor, but that, that's my, that's
my, that's the silver lining. As it were,
yeah, someone,
someone has to,
uh, direct Doctor Strangelove to I was reminded of
that because of the nukes.
Yes, exactly, exactly.
OK, so, uh, Emil, look, um, where can people
find you and your work on the internet?
So my main source of income right now is
my newsletter, which is called the Real-time Techpocalypse newsletter,
uh, because we are in right now, a techpocalypse.
Um, SO that's, that's where I, uh, publish most
of my writing. Um, IF you're interested, you can
also follow me on, uh, I hate to say
this, but on Twitter, still on Twitter, as well
as Blue Sky. My, my handle is X-riskology, ex-riskology.
Yeah.
OK, so I'll be leaving that in the description
of the interview, and look, thank you so much
for taking the time to come on the show.
I know that it's not been a very optimistic
discussion, but
well,
I think at least it's been a realistic one.
So thanks for doing it
again. Thanks for having me. I'm glad I could
cheer people up.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forrest Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inasi Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoras and
Hal Herzognon, Michel Jonathan Labrarith, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alec Baka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov,
Zal Adrian Yei Poltontin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall, Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolotti, Gabriel Pan
Scortez or Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony
Smith, and Wiseman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg
Jarno, Luke Lovai, Georgios Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin,
David Williams, Di Acosta, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D.
Lee Junior. Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber,
Robert Grassy, Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix,
Mark Kempel, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali
Mohammadi, Perpendicular, Janus Hetner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David
Pinsov, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A
special thanks to my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank
Lucas Stink, Tom Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlamon Negro,
Al Nick Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my
executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and
Rosie. Thank you for all.